1	कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन।	You have the right to work, not to the fruits of work.	Neutral
2	योगस्थः कुरु कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा धनंजय।	Perform actions with steady mind, free of attachment.	Positive
3	न हि कश्चित्क्षणमपि जातु तिष्ठत्यकर्मकृत्।	No one is ever without action even for a moment.	Neutral
4	श्रेयान्स्वधर्मो विगुणः परधर्मात्स्वनुष्ठितात्।	Better your own duty, even if imperfect, than another's well.	Positive
5	सर्वधर्मान्परित्यज्य मामेकं शरणं व्रज।	Abandon all duties and take refuge in Me alone.	Positive
6	यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत।	Whenever righteousness declines, I manifest myself.	Positive
7	अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते।	I am the source of all; from Me everything proceeds.	Neutral
8	विषयैश्वर्यविमुक्तानां सुखं ब्राम्हणगतम्।	The bliss of those free from desire is akin to the sage’s joy.	Positive
9	इमं विवस्वते योगं प्रोक्तवानहमव्ययम्।	I taught this imperishable yoga to Vivasvan long ago.	Neutral
10	यथागतं सुसमाचरन्।	Behave steadily on the path you have chosen.	Neutral
11	मामेवैष्यसि युक्तः कर्मबुद्धिर्विमुच्यते।	Those who act with devotion to Me are liberated.	Positive
12	ज्ञेयः स नित्यसंन्यासी यो न द्वेष्टि न काङ्क्षति।	He is to be known as a constant renouncer who neither hates nor desires.	Positive
13	उद्धरेदात्मनाऽऽत्मानं नाऽऽत्मानमवसादयेत्।	Raise yourself by yourself; do not degrade yourself.	Positive
14	क्लेशोऽधिकतरस्तेषामव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम्।	Difficulty is greater for minds attached to the unmanifest.	Negative
15	यत्करोषि यदश्नासि यज्जुहोषि ददासि यत्।	Whatever you do, eat, offer or give—do it as an offering to Me.	Positive
16	समोऽहं सर्वभूतेषु न मे द्वेष्योऽस्ति न प्रियः।	I am the same to all beings; I have no hate nor fondness.	Neutral
17	वितरागभयक्रोधा मन्मया मामुपाश्रिता।	Those without attachment, fear, or anger who are devoted to me...	Positive
18	विवेकविहितं बुद्ध्या तन्तुश्च सूक्ष्मबुद्धया।	Use discriminative intellect and subtle understanding.	Neutral
19	कर्मणैव हि संसिद्धिमास्थिता जनकादयः।	Perfection by action was achieved by Janaka and others.	Positive
20	नासतो विद्यते भावो नाभावो विद्यते सतः।	Non-existent has no being; the existent never ceases.	Neutral
21	छिन्नमात्रेण समानेन।	By a mere fraction, things change — be equanimous.	Neutral
22	समत्वं योग उच्यते।	Equanimity is called yoga.	Positive
23	ह्येवं प्रवर्तितं चक्रं नानुवर्तयतीह य:।	This cycle proceeds; none who follow it are freed easily.	Neutral
24	शान्तिं नियमेन्द्रियार्थेन्द्रियक्रियाविरतः।	Peace comes by restraining senses and actions through discipline.	Positive
25	दमोऽयमात्मशुद्धौ श्रेयः श्रेयस्य परं तमः।	Self-control in self-purification is the supreme good.	Positive
26	यत्र योगेश्वरः कृष्णो यत्र पार्थो धनुर्धरः।	Where Krishna is the Lord of yoga and Arjuna the archer...	Positive
27	न त्वहमार्य त्वं मे समीपस्थः।	I am not far, nor are you near — remain in devotion.	Neutral
28	आत्मौपम्येन सर्वत्र समं पश्यति योऽर्जुन।	One who sees all with the eye of the Self sees Dharma everywhere.	Positive
29	हतो वा प्राप्स्यसि स्वर्गं जघन्ये पुण्यकृत्।	If killed or victorious, you shall attain heaven by your righteous deed.	Neutral
30	यज्ञार्थात्कर्मणोऽन्यत्र लोकोऽयं कर्मबन्धनः।	People are bound by action when working for results, not for sacrifice.	Negative
31	कुरु कर्मेव तुम्।	Do your duty alone.	Neutral
32	यो मां पश्यति सर्वत्र सर्वं च मयि पश्यति।	He who sees Me in all and all in Me—he is steady.	Positive
33	निर्विकल्पोऽयं तद्ब्रह्म।	This is Brahman without conceptual distinctions.	Neutral
34	मुक्तिः परमा हि बुधाः।	For the wise, liberation is supreme.	Positive
35	दुःखेष्वनुद्विग्नमनाः सुखेषु विगतस्पृहः।	Unaffected in sorrow and free from craving in pleasure.	Positive
36	अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय विपश्यनेन चाविध्या।	Practice and clear seeing remove ignorance.	Positive
37	धृतराष्ट्रो वा महात्मन्।	Maintain steadiness like Dhritarashtra (example).	Neutral
38	परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम्।	For protecting the good and destroying the wicked I appear.	Positive
39	योगः कर्मसु कौशलम्।	Yoga is skill in action.	Positive
40	अनित्याश्च भूतानां नित्यश्च भगवान्।	Beings are transient; the Lord is eternal.	Neutral
41	अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते।	I am the origin of all; everything proceeds from Me.	Neutral
42	यथा हि वायुः सर्वत्र व्याप्यते।	As air pervades everywhere—so does I pervade.	Neutral
43	न दुःखं कुरुते चेतुरा आत्मन्येवात्मना तुष्टाः।	Those satisfied in the Self do not grieve.	Positive
44	नाहं प्रवर्यव्याति तु।	I am not interrupted; I remain supreme.	Neutral
45	अहं सर्वत्र सर्वं च नोहं तेषु चान्यथा।	I am present everywhere and in all things.	Neutral
46	न मे विदुः सर्वमिव।	They do not fully know Me.	Neutral
47	यस्य संप्रज्ञात्मा सांप्रज्ञो भवति।	He of steady intelligence becomes contemplative.	Neutral
48	विविक्तसेवा ये तपस्विनः सान्त्वनमश्नवन्ति।	Austerities in seclusion bring inner calm.	Positive
49	वैराग्येण चोपस्थिते।	When detachment is established...	Positive
50	सर्वसंन्यासी युक्त एव मम भक्तिम्।	A total renouncer, joined with devotion to Me.	Positive
51	आत्मौपम्येन सर्वत्र समं पश्यति।	Seeing all alike through self-like vision.	Positive
52	अभयं सवत्र समाश्रयः।	Take refuge without fear.	Positive
53	प्रयत्नेन भरतर्षभ।	With effort, O best of Bharata.	Positive
54	सर्वेषामात्मस्वरूपणाम्।	Of all, perceive their own Self.	Neutral
55	समत्वं परमं सुखम्।	Equanimity is the highest happiness.	Positive
56	हिंसा न करिष्ये जीवोन्नं विमोघतया।	I will not harm any living being wantonly.	Positive
57	यथा संहरते चायं कूर्मोऽङ्गानीव सर्वशः।	As a tortoise withdraws limbs, withdraw senses completely.	Positive
58	कर्मेन्द्रियाणि संयम्य य आस्ते मनसा स्मरन्।	Controlling senses, remembering Me in mind.	Positive
59	षड्भिः प्राहुर्यथेन्द्रियैः।	Six-fold control of the senses is taught.	Neutral
60	नैव तस्यां परिथयः।	There is no disparagement in that state.	Neutral
61	इन्द्रियाणि पराण्याहुरिन्द्रियेषु आत्मा।	Senses are superior to the sense-objects; the Self is superior to the senses.	Neutral
62	अहंकारपरिदाहोऽयं ह्येतद्बुद्धिनाशनम्।	Ego's burning is destroyed by enlightening knowledge.	Positive
63	यत् सुकृतमात्मना तत्त्वेन सेवधर्मणाम्।	What is rightly done in duty leads to self-quality.	Positive
64	विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगाद्।	From contact with sense-objects arises attachment.	Negative
65	द्वन्द्वातीतमशीतोष्णसुखदुःखयोर्व्रतम्।	To be beyond pairs of opposites—this is the vow.	Positive
66	सर्वदुःखान्विमुक्तो भव।	Be freed from all sorrow.	Positive
67	स तु दीर्घश्चिरकालिक्यः।	Hold steady for a long time.	Neutral
68	न हि क्षिप्रमेधावी।	The quick-witted are rare.	Neutral
69	आत्मनः प्रतिपालने।	By guarding the Self.	Positive
70	यदा संहते चित्ते बहुधा विजयं लभेत्।	When the mind is steady, one gains many victories.	Positive
71	निराशीर्यतचित्तात्मा।	The mind that is detached and determined...	Positive
72	सहजं सन्नियम्येव।	By control that is natural and steady.	Positive
73	अविद्यासहाय्येन।	With the help of ignorance (i.e., through removing it).	Neutral
74	विपश्चित् समेन्द्रियाः।	The wise have controlled senses.	Positive
75	वैराग्ये दधेयं।	Place your mind in detachment.	Positive
76	सर्वाधाराणि मनोजव।	All foundations of thought are swift in the mind.	Neutral
77	यः सम्यक्चिन्तयति स सफलः।	He who thinks rightly is successful.	Positive
78	द्विविधा हि भवति पुरुषस्य प्रतिभावः।	Human temperament is twofold.	Neutral
79	न हि ज्ञानेन सदृशं पवित्रमिह विद्यते।	Nothing here is as purifying as knowledge.	Positive
80	श्रेयो हि ज्ञानं प्राहुर्विचक्षणा लोकसृजिनः।	Those wise declare knowledge superior.	Positive
81	ज्ञानेन तु तदज्ञानं येषां नाशितमात्मनः।	For those whose ignorance is destroyed by knowledge...	Positive
82	समत्वं योग उच्यते।	Equanimity is called yoga.	Positive
83	कर्मण्यभिप्रयोऽवस्थितो हि।	One fixed in action without desire...	Neutral
84	नेषु चित्त विकर्षणमस्ति।	The mind is not easily diverted.	Neutral
85	अभयदानं न त्यजेत्।	Do not give up offering fearlessness.	Positive
86	नित्यसंन्यासी प्रकृतिनिर्वानश कृत्।	The true renouncer attains natural liberation.	Positive
87	कर्मण्यभिप्रयो हि तु।	Action aimed rightly indeed...	Neutral
88	जीवलोकस्य प्रवर्तते।	Lives in the world performing duty.	Neutral
89	असंशयं महाबाहो।	Without doubt, O mighty-armed one.	Neutral
90	ममैवांशो जीवलोके जीवभूतः सनातनः।	The living being is My eternal fragment.	Neutral
91	सर्वभूतस्थमात्मा।	The Self abides in all beings.	Neutral
92	नान्यः शास्त्रवित्परिद्धि।	No other authority surpasses scripture.	Neutral
93	मनोबुद्ध्यहंका रागद्वेषैः।	Mind, intellect, ego—clouded by attachment and aversion.	Negative
94	संस्पर्शेष्वहं कारणम्।	I am the cause of contact and separation.	Neutral
95	यथा तमसा गतः सर्पः।	Like a snake in darkness—without self-knowledge.	Negative
96	निर्ममो निरहङ्कारः।	Without selfishness, without ego.	Positive
97	कृतकृत्यप्रवृत्तिं त्यजेत्।	Abandon actions born of doer-ness.	Neutral
98	नित्यशुद्धात्मा समायेर्त।	The eternally pure self is realized in union.	Positive
99	यत्र योगश्च स्थितोऽन्ते।	Where yoga is established in the end...	Positive
100	सर्वेषु भूतेषु चात्मानं।	In all beings, the Self is to be seen.	Neutral
101	अहङ्कारा हि क्रियाशक्तिः।	Ego is indeed the power of action.	Neutral
102	बुद्धिस्थापनं कुरु।	Establish the mind in wisdom.	Positive
103	असक्तात्मा सफलः।	The unattached are successful.	Positive
104	संस्मृत्या च विभाव्यते।	Through recollection things are discerned.	Neutral
105	यः सर्वत्र समोऽभ्याचरेत्।	He who acts equally everywhere...	Positive
106	नैवं शोकमप्राप्तं कुरु।	Do not grieve thus for the unachieved.	Neutral
107	न हि प्रजाः सन्त्यधिकारिणः।	No creatures are without their share.	Neutral
108	अहं प्रवर्तकः।	I am the active principle.	Neutral
109	मानवाधिपतिः।	The lord among humans—(be steady).	Neutral
110	नियतं कुरु कर्म त्वं।	Perform prescribed duty.	Neutral
111	नैव तत्समश्चित्रम्।	There is no equal counterexample.	Neutral
112	मुक्तो यः स तेन भवेत्।	He who is liberated becomes that.	Positive
113	इन्द्रियाणि पराण्यहुरात्मा।	The Self is above the senses.	Neutral
114	विपरीतमनेन विना।	Not without turning the mind inward.	Neutral
115	वैराग्येन परं सुखम्।	Detachment yields supreme happiness.	Positive
116	अन्तःकरणे कठिनम्।	Inward discipline is difficult.	Neutral
117	समत्वं मम धर्मः।	Equanimity is My law.	Positive
118	न त्वहं तवाश्रयः।	I am not dependent on you.	Neutral
119	अहंकारो बन्धकः।	Ego is a bond.	Negative
120	यथोद्दिष्टं कुरु अर्जुन।	Do as instructed, O Arjuna.	Neutral
121	अद्वितीयं ब्रह्म।	Brahman is without a second.	Neutral
122	सत्यमेव जयते।	Truth alone conquers.	Positive
123	सुखदुःखसमानम्।	Equal in joy and sorrow.	Positive
124	यज्ञेनाहं अपरं।	By sacrifice I am upheld.	Neutral
125	निहत्य शत्रून् धर्मेण।	Slaying enemies by righteousness.	Neutral
126	राजन्स्तु तस्य ज्ञानम्।	Knowledge is the king’s wealth.	Neutral
127	पापानि च सर्वाणि।	All sins are removed.	Positive
128	धृतिः परमो बलम्।	Fortitude is the supreme strength.	Positive
129	परित्राणाय साधूनाम्।	For the protection of the righteous.	Positive
130	नास्त्यायुषः परम्।	There is nothing greater than life.	Neutral
131	श्रेयः परं ब्रवीमि।	I tell you the highest good.	Positive
132	सत्त्वं परम भूषणम्।	Sattva (purity) is the supreme ornament.	Positive
133	रजोगुणसमुद्भवं।	Arises from tamas and rajas.	Negative
134	सम्यग्दर्शनं परं ज्ञानम्।	Right perception is supreme knowledge.	Positive
135	श्रद्धावान् लभते ज्ञानम्।	One with faith attains knowledge.	Positive
136	योगिनो महत्त्वं विना।	Qualities of great yogis—without pride.	Positive
137	दिव्यं चक्षुर्लभते।	They obtain the divine eye.	Positive
138	सर्वदा विषये चिन्त्यते।	Always thinking of objects binds one.	Negative
139	नैव तेषां समतुल्यम्।	There is no equal among them.	Neutral
140	ममाश्रयं गच्छन्ति।	They take refuge in Me.	Positive
141	करोति योऽपि मामनुसरन्।	Whoever follows Me acts rightly.	Positive
142	विघ्नमपि न भवति।	No obstacle remains.	Positive
143	सत्यमेव व्यवस्थितम्।	Truth stands established.	Positive
144	नहुयम् आत्मनः कारणम्।	I am not the cause of the self's ignorance.	Neutral
145	विद्या विनयसम्पन्ने ब्राह्मणे गवि हस्तिनि।	On the learned, humility bestows greatness.	Positive
146	न्यायपरिणामेण।	By rightful consequence.	Neutral
147	कुरु भारतपुत्र।	Do, O son of Bharata.	Neutral
148	निराश्रमणं कुरु।	Perform actions without seeking rest.	Neutral
149	ध्यानयोगेन समाहिताः।	Steady through meditation.	Positive
150	न मे प्रियं द्विषतः।	I have no love for haters.	Neutral
151	सम्यक्संकल्पे सन्नद्धः।	Prepared with right resolve.	Positive
152	यथा संहरते चायं कूर्मोऽङ्गानीव सर्वशः।	Withdraw senses as a tortoise withdraws limbs.	Positive
153	विनम्रता परम धर्मः।	Humility is the supreme duty.	Positive
154	अहर्निशं तपसं शीलम्।	Day and night, austerity and conduct.	Positive
155	सर्वधर्मान्परित्यज्य मामेकं शरणं व्रज।	Abandon all dharmas and take refuge in Me.	Positive
156	विपरीतं बुद्धयः कार्यं न करिष्यन्ति।	Those of inverted intellect do not act rightly.	Negative
157	नश्चित्तवृत्तिः सन्ध्या।	Mind-waves are calmed by twilight meditation.	Neutral
158	यस्यान्तःकरणं शुद्धम्।	Whose inner being is pure...	Positive
159	स्वभावजं कर्म कौशलम्।	Skill in action arises from nature.	Neutral
160	सहजं ब्रह्मसमाधिः।	Attainment of Brahman is natural for some.	Positive
161	अस्मिन्स्थितः समाचरन्।	Established in this, act equally.	Positive
162	न हि कर्म का अपवर्गः।	Not every action leads to liberation.	Neutral
163	नियतं कुरु कर्म त्वम्।	Perform your prescribed duty.	Neutral
164	नैव तत्र परायुजनम्।	Therein is no vanquished soul.	Neutral
165	विहाय कामान्यः सर्वान्।	Abandoning all desires...	Positive
166	मुक्त्वा सर्वानकर्माणि।	Having renounced all actions.	Positive
167	सर्वदा समः सन्नतः।	Always equally poised.	Positive
168	न मेऽत एव संस्पर्शः।	My contact is not as you think.	Neutral
169	असंयोगविकारः।	The change is due to contact and separation.	Neutral
170	अहं प्रतिभमयः सर्वदा।	I am ever the splendor of beings.	Neutral
171	न मे हृदयेषु स्थितिः।	I do not reside only in hearts.	Neutral
172	यत्र योगेश्वरः कृष्णो यत्र पार्थो धनुर्धरः।	Where Krishna is Lord and Partha the archer...	Positive
173	तत्रिभवति सुसमृद्धिः।	There arises great prosperity there.	Positive
174	यत्र सर्वे सम्मताः।	Where all agree...	Neutral
175	अज्ञानं कर्मणाम्।	Ignorance in actions leads to bondage.	Negative
176	ज्ञानं परमो बलम्।	Knowledge is supreme strength.	Positive
177	आत्मनस्तनुशुद्धिः।	Purification of the Self-body.	Positive
178	ध्यानयोगः परमोत्कर्षः।	Meditation-yoga is the highest excellence.	Positive
179	नैतदात्मनि स्थितम्।	This is not established in the Selfless.	Neutral
180	निर्वाणं परमानन्दम्।	Nirvana is supreme bliss.	Positive
181	सर्वतः प्रतिष्ठितम्।	Established everywhere.	Neutral
182	यज्ञश्च सर्वधर्मोत्थानम्।	Sacrifice upholds all dharmas.	Neutral
183	नन्दीकृत्य च कर्म।	Act with joy in duty.	Positive
184	आत्मज्ञानं परमं।	Self-knowledge is supreme.	Positive
185	मत्परः स मे प्रियः।	He is dear to Me who is devoted.	Positive
186	कृष्णार्पणं मनःस्वीकारः।	Offer mind to Krishna.	Positive
187	समत्वं त्विदं परम्।	This equanimity is supreme.	Positive
188	नैव तस्य परायणम्।	There is no other refuge for him.	Neutral
189	यच्छ्रेयः सुहृदः वदेत्।	Speaks what is for the welfare of friends.	Positive
190	दुर्लभं हि स साक्षात्।	It is indeed hard to attain directly.	Neutral
191	रजसिकं क्रोधहेतुकम्।	Rajas causes anger.	Negative
192	तस्माद्योगाय युज्यस्व।	Therefore be dedicated to yoga.	Positive
193	न हि परस्परवोक्ताः।	Not mutually stated elsewhere.	Neutral
194	संसर्गवर्जितम्।	Devoid of contact.	Positive
195	वैराग्यमुपेत्य भावः।	A state endowed with detachment.	Positive
196	कर्तव्योऽहं धर्मतः।	I must act according to dharma.	Neutral
197	नैव तु स महात्मा।	Not so, indeed he is great.	Neutral
198	अतिथि मित्र परम।	Kindness to guests is supreme.	Positive
199	परमार्थसिद्धये।	For the attainment of the supreme goal.	Positive
200	मोक्षार्थं कुर्वाणः सर्वदा स्तः।	One who acts for liberation is always praised.	Positive